---
layout: post
title:  "CD15 and CD8 Expression in White Pulp"
author: Amanda Kwok
jhed: akwok1
categories: [ HW6 ]
image: homework/hw6/hw6_akwok1.png
featured: false
---

### Perform a full analysis (quality control, dimensionality reduction, kmeans clustering, differential expression analysis) on your data. Your goal is to figure out what tissue structure is represented in the CODEX data. Options include: (1) Artery/Vein, (2) White pulp, (3) Red pulp, (4) Capsule/Trabecula. You will need to visualize and interpret at least two cell-types. Create a data visualization and write a description to convince me that your interpretation is correct. 

I started the data analysis by plotting the total withiness and determining that 3-4 clusters is the ideal number of clusters. I ultimately decided on 4 clusters after plotting the gene expressions of the genes with most variations since 4 clusters better describe the gene expression spatial boundaries in reduced dimensions. 

After deciding on 4 clusters, I found that the most prominent differentially expressed genes in each cluster is as follows: 1. CD107a, 2. CD15, 3. CD8, 4. Vimentin. I also found that the most expressed genes in the dataset are the same 4 genes.

Most expressed in order:      Genes with most variance:
1. CD15                       1. CD15
2. Vimentin                   2. CD8
3. CD107a                     3. Vimentin
4. CD8                        4. CD107a

The above further support the clustering of my cells in lower dimensional space. Given these 4 clusters, I plotted the most prominent differentially expressed cells to see how well they align with their assigned cluster. Clusters 1 and 2 visibly aligned the most as seen the figures for CD15 and CD8, their clusters visualized in physical space align well with their gene expression visualzied in physical space. From researching the genes, I found that CD8 is highly associated with CD8+ T-cells and that CD15 are highly associated with macrophages. These classfiications of cell types/populations makes sense in the context that the data is taken from the spleen for several reasons. First, the spleen is known for it's function in immune response which is regulated by the white pulp, and immune responses to infection, etc, involve the activation or proliferation of T cells located in the white pulp of the spleen. Second, macrophages which are invovled in clearance of red blood cells are also present in the spleen. Often found in the red pulp but also found in the white pulp. 

Now that we know CD8 is likely a cell population of T cells and CD15 represents a cell population of macrophages, looking further into the other 2 clusters researched, we can conclude that this dataset is most likely representing the White pulp of the spleen. This is supported by the high expression of Vimentin which is commonly associated with fibroblasts in the white pulp and macrophages in the red pulp. Additionally, CD107a is associated with natural killer (NK) cells which are incredibly abundant in the white pulp. Although 2 of these genes are associated with cells in the red pulp, CD8 and Vimentin are more strongly observed in the white pulp and thus I believe that the tissue structure being represented is the white pulp. 



### References:
- CD15 cell type: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2052920/
- CD8 cell type: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4669000/#:~:text=Experiments%20with%20influenza%20virus%20antigens,monocytogenes%20and%20lymphocytic%20choriomeningitis%20virus.

- CD107a cell type: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15604012/
- vimentin cell type/spleen location: https://www.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000026025-VIM/tissue/spleen 

### Code:






