---
layout: post
title: "Spatially Resolved Gene Expression Analysis using KMeans clustering"
author: Nidhi Soley
jhed: nsoley1
categories: [ HW4 ]
image: homework/hw4/hw4_nsoley1.png
featured: false
---

#### Describe your figure briefly so we know what you are depicting (you no longer need to use precise data visualization terms as you have been doing). Write a description to convince me that your cluster interpretation is correct. Your description may reference papers and content that allowed you to interpret your cell cluster as a particular cell-type. You must provide attribution to external resources referenced. Links are fine; formatted references are not required.

Firstly I applied KMeans clustering on the normalized gene expression data, with random K=3. Then, I chose a cluster which was scattered at few spots in spatial position (blue in color), not together like cluster 1 and 2. I was interested to see which gene is highly expressed in this cluster. I performed t-test to see the upregulated genes in this cluster of interest. I found that DSP (pvalue 2.519682e-99) was the top gene that was upregulated. Further, I visualized DSP in the physical space and in PCA space.

1.  **Spatial Distribution of Clusters**: The first panel shows the spatial distribution of spots with multiple cell-types within the tissue. Each spot is represented by a point on the plot, with colors hue indicating the clusters assigned by KMeans clustering. Notably, cluster one (shown in red) appears scattered across the tissue, contrasting with the more cohesive distributions of clusters two and three.
2.  **Spatial Distribution of Cluster of interest**: The second panel shows the spatial distribution of the spots with multiple cell-types for cluster 1.
3.  **Gene Expression in Physical Space**: The third panel displays the expression pattern of the gene DSP across the spatial coordinates. Each point represents a spot, colored based on its expression level of DSP. Notably, cells corresponding to cluster one, which were identified as scattered in spatial position (red in first/second plot), exhibit high expression of DSP (yellow).
4.  **Gene Expression in PCA Space**: The fourth panel illustrates the expression pattern of DSP projected onto a reduced-dimensional space obtained through PCA. Spots with multiple-cells within cluster one, which were spatially dispersed, cluster together in this reduced-dimensional space based on their similar expression profiles of DSP.The yellow spots are clustered together on the negative PC1, and PC2 axis. This clustering pattern implies that the yellow spots within cluster one likely represent a subpopulation of cells that exhibit high DSP expression, possibly associated with a particular cell type or functional state.

By integrating spatial information with gene expression analysis, I inferred that cluster one likely represents spots containing multiple cell types characterized by high expression of the DSP gene. The known biology of DSP, or desmoplakin, indicates its involvement in cell-cell adhesion, particularly within desmosomes, structures found in tissues subjected to mechanical stress, such as the skin and heart[1][2]. Hence, I speculate that the cell types within cluster one may correspond to cell type like- epithelial cells in the skin, and cardiac muscle cells (e.g., cardiomyocytes).

[1] Green KJ, Simpson CL. Desmosomes: new perspectives on a classic. J Invest Dermatol. 2007;127(11):2499-2515. <doi:10.1038/sj.jid.5700915>

[2] McGrath, J. A., & Mellerio, J. E. (2010). Ectodermal dysplasia-skin fragility syndrome. Dermatologic clinics, *28*(1), 125–129. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.det.2009.10.014>

#### You must include the entire code you used to generate the figure so that it can be reproduced.

```{r}
library(viridis)
library(patchwork)
library(ggplot2)
data <- read.csv('/Users/nidhisoley/Desktop/GDataViz/eevee.csv.gz', row.names=1)
pos <- data[, c("aligned_x", "aligned_y")]
gexp <- data[, 4:ncol(data)]
gexpnorm <- log10(gexp/rowSums(gexp) * mean(rowSums(gexp)) + 1)
pcs <- prcomp(gexpnorm)
#K-means
clusters <- as.factor(kmeans(gexpnorm, centers = 3)$cluster)
p1 <- ggplot(data.frame(pos, Cluster = clusters)) + 
  geom_point(aes(x = aligned_x, y = aligned_y, col = Cluster), size = 3) + 
  theme_bw() +
  labs(title = "Clusters in Physical Space")
#cluster of interest
cluster_of_interest <- 1
df <- data.frame(data, kmeans=(clusters))
df1 <- df[df$kmeans == cluster_of_interest,]
p2 <-ggplot(df1) + geom_point(aes(x = aligned_x, y=aligned_y, col=kmeans), 
                              size=3) + theme_bw() + 
  labs(title='Cluster of interest in Physical Space')+
  labs(color='Cluster') 
#t-test
cluster_1_genes <- colnames(gexpnorm)[clusters == cluster_of_interest]
results <- sapply(cluster_1_genes, function(g) {
  t.test(gexpnorm[clusters == cluster_of_interest, g],
         gexpnorm[clusters != cluster_of_interest, g],
         alternative = 'greater')$p.val
})
significant_genes <- names(head(sort(results[results < 0.05])))
#DSP
gene_of_interest <- 'DSP'
p3 <- ggplot(data.frame(pos, gene = gexpnorm[, gene_of_interest])) +
  geom_point(aes(x = aligned_x, y = aligned_y, col = gene), size = 3) +
  scale_color_viridis(option = 'plasma')+
  theme_bw() +
  labs(title = paste("Expression of", gene_of_interest, "in Physical Space"))
p4 <- ggplot(data.frame(pcs$x, gene = gexpnorm[, gene_of_interest])) +
  geom_point(aes(x = PC1, y = PC2, col = gene), size = 2) +
  scale_color_viridis(option = 'plasma')+
  theme_bw() +
  labs(title = paste("Expression of", gene_of_interest, "in PCA space"))
p1 +p2+p3+p4
  plot_layout(ncol = 2)



```
