---
layout: post
title:  "Spatial Localization of Spatial-Barcode Beads for Total Number of Distinct Genes Expressed"
author: Jonathan Wang
jhed: jwang428
categories: [ HW1 ]
image: homework/hw1/hw1_jwang428.png
featured: false
---

### What data types are you visualizing?
I am visualizing the (1) quantitative data for the total number of distinct genes expressed 
for each spatial-barcode bead and (2) spatial data for the aligned x,y positions of each
spatial-barcode bead. The total number of distinct genes expressed per spatial-barcode bead was 
calculated by counting the number of genes with associated values > 0 within the provided data 
(eevee.csv.gz). 

### What data encodings (geometric primitives and visual channels) are you using to visualize these data types?
I am using the geometric primitive of points to represent each spatial-barcode bead, with the associated 
aligned x-position and aligned y-position being represented through the visual primitive of position (the 
aligned x-position varying based on position along the horizontal axis and the aligned y-position varying
based on position along the vertical axis). To encode the total number of distinct genes expressed for each
spatial-barcode bead, I am using the visual channel of color, specifically hue as lower counts are associated
with "blue" and higher counts are associated with "red".

### What about the data are you trying to make salient through this data visualization? 
My data visualization seeks to make salient the spatial localization of the diverse amount of gene expression
across the sample. More specifically, by encoding the quantitative value of "distinct gene expression" by 
color, it attempts to elucidate grouped areas of higher genetic expression. One can also note patterns of 
areas whereby the genetic expression progressively (from "blue" to "green" to "red") goes from lower to 
higher.

### What Gestalt principles or knowledge about perceptiveness of visual encodings are you using to accomplish this?
As mentioned previously, I specifically looked to utilize the Gestalt principal of similarity regarding the 
quantitative value of "distinct gene expression". Spatial-barcode beads with similar genetic expression 
levels are of the similar color hue: for example, "medium" expression spatial-barcode beads can be visually 
grouped together based on areas that are colored "green". I would also like to note that although based on
the "ranking of encodings" as outlined by Nils Gehlenborg hue is not ranked highly for encoding
quantitative value, I believe it was the best option in this scenario. When using the size of the points
to relay the quanitative value, it was actually more confusing to distinguish which points were actually
bigger or smaller. The color range of "blue" to "green" to "red" is an easier visual cue. 


```{r}
data <- read.csv('eevee.csv.gz', row.names = 1)

dim(data)
data[1:10, 1:10]
colnames(data)

# Initialization of variables
data <- read.csv('eevee.csv.gz', row.names = 1)

dim(data)
data[1:10, 1:10]
colnames(data)

# Initialization of variables
x_pos <- data[,2]
y_pos <- data[,3]
gen_exp <- data[,4:ncol(data)]
colnames(gen_exp)

# Determine total # of genes expressed by each barcode
gen_exp_count <- rowSums(gen_exp != 0)
total_genes_exp = as.numeric(gen_exp_count)

# making the data visualization
library(ggplot2)
p <- ggplot(data) + 
  geom_point(aes(x = x_pos, y = y_pos, col = total_genes_exp), size = 2) + 
  xlab("Aligned X Position") + ylab("Aligned Y Position") + ggtitle("Spatial Localization of Spatial-Barcode Beads for Total Number of Distinct Genes Expressed") +
  scale_colour_gradientn(colors = c("blue", "lightblue", "lightgreen", "green", "yellow", "red")) + theme(plot.title = element_text(hjust = 0.5))

p + theme(legend.title.align=0.5) + labs(color="Total Distinct Genes Expressed")
```